# Terrestrial Ecosystem Community

### Background 
Flexible mechanistic modeling and simulation capabilities play a critical role in enabling the Terrestrial Ecosystem Community to address important environmental questions, such as the prediction of water availability and quality from critical watersheds under prolonged drought and warming temperatures. Integrated multi-disciplinary projects in the Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Biological and Environmental Research (BER) are developing mechanistic process-rich models of nutrient and carbon cycling, and are collecting field and laboratory data to help inform and constrain these models.  

### Software Challenges for Terrestrial Ecosystem Researchers
These science questions raise a range of software challenges.  First, legacy codes contain significant mechanistic modeling capabilities, but need to be refactored to componentize these capabilities so that they may be shared between codes and coupled to describe more complex systems. Second, most codes do not have comprehensive automated tests that enable refactoring of the design with confidence.  Also, most existing multiphysics frameworks have limited flexibility and extensibility as they are based on the a priori static enumeration of a small number of coupling scenarios.  In contrast, models of terrestrial ecosystems are increasingly process-rich, and investigations include the iterative addition and removal of processes from the model.  Thus, runtime configurable multiphysics and multiscale frameworks, such as those based on dynamically created dependency graphs are a critical challenge. To this end, interdisciplinary teams are exploring agile methodologies to support the componentization of legacy codes, common interface designs, multiphysics frameworks, and model-data integration workflows.

### Learn how the terrestrial ecosystem community can contribute to the BetterScientificSoftware site.
We encourage scientific library developers to share ideas about addressing challenges in multiscale and multiphysics coupling, refactoring, and other concerns.  See [What To Contribute](WhatToContribute.md) and [How To Contribute](HowToContribute.md).
