# The Workshop on Sustainable Software Sustainability 2021 (WoSSS21)
- Date: October 6-8, 2021
- Location: virtual
- Event Website: https://wosss.org/wosss21/home/
- Organizers: DANS, SSI, and the Netherlands eScience Center
			   
<!-- deck text start -->
The Workshop on Sustainable Software Sustainability (WoSSS) series focuses on the topic of software sustainability, particularly on bringing together different research communities and provisions for the long term. 
<!-- deck text end -->

Event Information | Details
:--- | :---			   
Event Name | [The Workshop on Sustainable Software Sustainability 2021 (WoSSS21)](https://wosss.org/wosss21/home/)
Event Date | October 6-8, 2021
Website | https://wosss.org/wosss21/home/

WoSSS21 will surface key areas of software sustainability in cultural heritage, Open Science & FAIR software, research software and human infrastructures. The workshop will take place online from Wednesday 6th - Friday 8th October 2021. The program has been curated to cover a broad cross section of software sustainability topics and a diverse mixture of speakers. The full workshop program is available at <https://wosss.org/wosss21/agenda/>.

Registration is now open to participate in WoSSS21! The workshop program features multiple break out discussion sessions. These sessions will capture the points of view of workshop participants and these will be reflected a final report. The real value of WoSSS is in the contributions by workshop participants. The organizers invite you to join and make WoSSS a success! Please feel free to share this invitation to your network.

WoSSS21 is a free to attend event and you must agree to abide by the participation guidelines - WoSSS aims to be a welcoming and safe workshop environment. WoSSS21 consists of four sessions, two AM and two PM; to help facilitate international participation.

<!---
Publish: yes
Pinned: no
Topics: Conferences and workshops, Software engineering
--->
