# Software Engineering for Research Software (SE4RS'23)

<!-- deck text start --> 
The goal of this workshop is to provide a unique venue for the presentation of results and to facilitate interaction between software engineers and members of the research software community.
<!-- deck text ends -->

- Submission Deadline: May 12, 2023
- Event Dates: July 23-27, 2023
- Location: Portland, Oregon
- Website: https://se4science.org/workshops/se4rs23/index.htm
- Organizers: SE4Science Workshop Series

#### Contributed by [David E. Bernholdt](https://github.com/bernhold/)

#### Publication date: March 14, 2023

Event Information | Details
:--- | :---			   
Event Name | [Software Engineering for Research Software (SE4RS'23)](https://se4science.org/workshops/se4rs23/index.htm)
Event Dates |  June 27-29, 2023
Submission Deadline | May 12, 2023
Website | https://se4science.org/workshops/se4rs23/index.htm

This is a time of great growth at the intersection of software engineering and research software, There is a need for members of the software engineering and research software communities to share experiences, identify problems, and enumerate common goals to form the basis for an ongoing research agenda. The goal of this workshop is to provide a unique venue for the presentation of results and to facilitate interaction between software engineers and members of the research software community. To address this goal, we seek contributions from members of those communities that describe perspectives, research outcomes, and lessons learned (positive or negative) from the development of research software. Specifically, we are interested in the software development and software engineering challenges and enablers relating to the following topics:

- Research software applications that solve complex software- or data-intensive research problems, from large parallel models/simulations of the physical world using HPC systems to smaller scale simulations developed by a single researcher on a desktop machine or a small cluster.
- Applications that support scientific research and experiments at scale. Such applications include, but are not limited to, systems for managing and/or manipulating large amounts of data and systems that provide infrastructure for scientific or engineering applications such as libraries or HPC/Cloud software.
- The process for building, reusing, and publishing software and data used in scientific experiments or engineering innovations. Among others, these processes include agile approaches, open source/open data issues, testing scientific software, and managing software or data repositories for publishing goals.
- The process of theory-software translation, where loss or errors may occur due to challenges mapping between scientific theory and its representation in code, or between the outputs of computational research and its representation in theory.

This track will build upon previous [SE4Science](http://se4science.org/workshops) workshops. Similar to the format of the previous workshops, in addition to presentation and discussion of the accepted papers, we plan to devote significant time during the workshop to discussing important topics that arise from the paper presentations. The goal of these discussions is to (1) develop a joint research plan that can be conducted collectively by workshop participants and (2) development of ideas/draft of position statements to be published externally.

We encourage submissions from members of the software engineering and research software communities addressing issues including but not limited to:
- Case studies of software development processes used in research software applications;
- Design patterns and software architectures for research software;
- Software engineering metrics and tool support for research software applications;
- Issues in publishing or reusing research software and data;
- The use of empirical studies to better understand the environment, tools, languages, and processes used in research software application development and how they might be improved; and
- V&V techniques specifically targeted for research software .

Please check the [conference webpage](https://se4science.org/workshops/se4rs23/index.htm) for further details and updates.

<!---
Publish: yes
Topics: conferences and workshops
--->
