# Improving Scientific Software Conference 2024

- Abstract deadline: Jan 26, 2024
- Event dates: April 15, 2024 - April 19, 2024
- Location: Boulder, CO
- Event Website: https://sea.ucar.edu/conference/2024
- Organizers: UCAR Software Engineering Assembly

The 2024 Improving Scientific Software Conference will be held during the week of April 15-19, 2024 in Boulder, Colorado. We will also offer a virtual registration option for those interested in remote attendance.

This year’s conference will focus on the modernization of scientific software and what that means to our community now and in the years to come. We welcome any submissions that touch on the challenges and opportunities of modernizing software code, workflows, development, and more. Potential submissions topics include:

* Modernizing scientific code in large and small projects
* Porting codes to new architectures (e.g., accelerators, Arm CPUs…)
* Utilizing machine learning
* Modernizing software development practices
* Adopting continuous integration and/or development in existing projects
* Using code review during development
* Building communities around scientific software
* Democratizing software development
* Improving scientific workflows
* Incorporating containers into science workflows

We are also planning to adopt Jupyter Notebooks as paper proceedings for those interested in submitting. Notebooks seamlessly combine descriptions of work and process, supporting graphics, and relevant code into a self-contained and (optimally) rerunnable package.

### Who is this conference geared toward?

The conference is for staff and students at research institutions, universities, and industry who are interested in learning and discussing the latest developments and practices in scientific software. Those working in the geosciences will likely find it more relevant. However, anyone who finds the agenda beneficial to them is welcome to attend even if they do not fit the category previously stated.

#### Publication date: 2024-01-24

#### Contributed by: [David Bernholdt](https://github.com/bernhold)

<!---
Publish: yes
Topics: conferences and workshops, software engineering
--->
