# Improving Scientific Software Conference 2025

- Abstract deadline: Jan 24, 2024
- Event dates: April 7-10, 2025
- Location: Boulder, CO and online
- Event Website: https://sea.ucar.edu/iss/2025/
- Organizers: UCAR Software Engineering Assembly

The 2025 Improving Scientific Software Conference will be held during the week of April 7-10, 2025 in Boulder, Colorado. We will also offer a virtual registration option for those interested in remote attendance.

The annual Improving Scientific Software Conference brings together software engineers, scientists, developers - any individuals with an interest in scientific software design - to share novel experiences and best practices, develop connections across divisions and institutions, and advance our community.

The pace of change for those using and developing scientific software accelerated in ways we have not seen in some time. Increasingly, tools and even models from the private sector are crossing over into our science domains. Large hyperscalers are driving changes in hardware priorities and we must adapt. And generative AI developments invite both potential and uncertainty for both developers and scientists.

The 2025 Improving Scientific Software Conference is organized by the UCAR Software Engineering Assembly (SEA).

### Audience

The conference is for staff and students at research institutions, universities, and in industry who are interested in learning and discussing the latest developments and practices in scientific software. Those working in the geosciences will likely find it most relevant. However, anyone who finds the agenda beneficial to them is welcome to attend even if they do not fit the category previously stated.

### Topics

We welcome any abstracts related to improvements in scientific software, particularly those focused on the following topics:

- Staying current with modern trends in RSE
- AI/ML, including its use in software development
- Community and legacy software development and modernization
- Improving the accessibility and usability of code bases to reach larger audiences (documentation, Jupyter notebooks, etc.)
- Scientific data analysis or visualization software
- Software development for HPC, accelerators, or any other non-standard hardware architectures
- Software management, both technical (e.g. CI/CD) and personnel-oriented (e.g. managing a team of developers)
- Continuously updating code bases to keep up with evolving background science; how innovations in science drive software development

We also strongly encourage abstracts from student and early-career participants who might be interested.

For full details and updates, please see the event website: <https://sea.ucar.edu/iss/2025/>

#### Publication date: 2024-12-18

#### Contributed by: [David Bernholdt](https://github.com/bernhold)

<!---
Publish: yes
Topics: conferences and workshops, software engineering
--->
