# Recent Successes with PSIP on HDF5

## Introduction
[Productivity and Sustainability Improvement Planning (PSIP)](https://bssw-psip.github.io/)
is a lightweight, incremental and iterative approach (like Agile) for making routine software
process improvements. It is easily applied within existing development workflows. Quoting from
a [November 2019 workshop paper](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-44728-1_6)
describing PSIP…

> PSIP breaks from classic software process improvement approaches such as CMM(I), SPICE, ISO
> 9000 or Six Sigma, in that it trades comprehensive standards and certification-driven assessment
> for self-defined, internally driven goals. It does, however, carry forward such ideas as having
> staged models of improvement (like CMM(I)) in the form of progress tracking cards. PSIP is more
> aligned with agile methods; it adopts their emphasis on iterative improvement and continuous
> learning.

PSIP helps already overburdened teams define and carry out a series of small, incremental steps of
progression towards process improvement goals without significant (there will be some, but a key goal
is to avoid *significant*) disruption to ongoing development activities. A key enabling tool in PSIP
is the use of Progress Tracking Cards (PTCs) which define the steps of progression towards a given
improvement goal.

The PSIP for HDF5 project was aimed at putting PSIP into practice with the purpose of evaluating its
effectiveness. HDF5 was chosen as a use case for several reasons. First, NNSA labs and LLNL in
particular (the sponsors of this project) have a keen interest in how HDF5 quality impacts its uptake
and sustainability as a community adopted and supported code. Next, HDF5 is a foundational library, a
key substrate in the HPC/CSE software stack. Any improvements realized through this effort will have
benefits to many DOE applications depending on it. HDF5 also represents an older, legacy code with
technical debts to pay down. These characteristics are similar to many NNSA and even some ECP code
projects. But, because HDF5 is an I/O library, it represents a simpler use case within which to study
PSIP than a full-fledged and significantly more complex PDE simulation code. We believe these attributes
make HDF5 an ideal use case for evaluating PSIP.

## Timeline of Project
In mid-April of 2020, a $150K contract was established with [The HDF Group](https://www.hdfgroup.org),
the organization responsible for developing and maintaining HDF5, to employ PSIP for a small set of
software process improvement goals. We adopted the following timeline of work…

Who | What | When Completed
:---|:---|:---
PSIP Team | Kickoff training/meeting | April 22, 2020
THG | List of candidate IGs | May 4, 2020
LLNL+THG | Down-select IGs | May 6, 2020
THG | Develop PTCs | May 15, 2020
THG | Schedule/Resource Plan | May 22, 2020
THG+LLNL| Execute plan & progress updates | Bi-weekly to project end|

### Kickoff Meeting/Training (late April 2020)
IDEAS-ECP team members leading the PSIP half of the effort, Elsa Gonsiorowski and Reed Milewicz, hosted
a two-hour training in which the PSIP process and PTC tools were introduced. Eight THG staff attended.
The goals were to introduce THG staff to what PSIP is and how to think about applying it to effect
software process improvements. In these initial stages, getting the right *thinking cap* on with respect
to what PSIP is and how to go about applying it is critical in helping the whole process be successful.
A key and important theme that comes through loud and clear is that the process is intended to be
non-judgmental, objective and consensus-driven with input from all stakeholders. This whole-team
engagement in understanding the project’s overall productivity “pain points” is helpful in enabling the
team to establish a candidate set of improvement goals.

### Candidate Improvement Goals and Down-selection (early-May 2020)
After the introductory PSIP training, THG brainstormed possible improvement goals.
The THG team came up with an initial list of 13 improvement goals, some more fully and clearly defined
than others. The initial list included such items as improving new developer on-boarding processes,
unifying the use of test-driven development and adopting consistent coding standards. 
With a set of candidate goals, PSIP experts met with THG to help refine and down-select based upon how
well defined the goal was as well as the likelihood of achievement (at least in substantial portions –
see below) within the scope of the contract. Three improvement goal categories were selected

1.	Improvement Goal #1 (IG1): Update Processes for maintaining the API Reference Manual
2.	Improvement Goal #2 (IG2): Migrate HDF5 source code to GitHub
3.	Improvement Goal #3 (IG3): Adopt a set of Consistent Coding Standards

THG then worked with PSIP experts (again Elsa) to draft initial Project Tracking Cards (PTC) for each
goal. However, the PTCs initially developed were significantly refined by THG staff in their own
follow-on meetings. THG was encouraged to be free in defining PTCs that included steps beyond those to
be completed within the terms of the project contract.

Developing quality PTCs is essential but also non-trivial and often requires facilitation from an
objective third party or PSIP expert. The challenge is ensuring that each step in the progression has a
good definition of done and also represents a value-added end state in and of itself. If activity on
successive steps winds up being postponed, the steps completed to that point still yield value to the
project and are easily adopted as part routine development workflow. The work to that point is not
orphaned on some parallel branch of activity making the effort invested in the earlier steps wasted.
This is a critically important aspect of PSIP and PTC formulation.

### PTC Development and Refinement (late-May 2020)
For each of the improvement goals identified, THG developed and refined a Progress Tracking Card (PTC).
THG began with the example PTCs from the existing [PSIP catalog](https://bssw-psip.github.io/ptc-catalog/catalog/)
but quickly evolved these to fit their own needs. Relevant THG staff members participated in PTC development
meetings to help refine the steps involved in progressing towards each improvement goal. There was significant
dialog and consensus building among team members to reach agreement on what each improvement goal actually meant.
For example, improving the reference manual (IG1) for one stakeholder can easily mean something entirely
different for another stakeholder. Several of the initial staff meetings involved helping the team to come to
consensus on what the improvement goals specifically meant.

Next, eliciting input from team members on PTCs went poorly early on primarily because this activity
represented a substantial change in thinking-caps team members were accustomed to (and that work pressures
permitted) wearing. Team members were more accustomed to working under the extreme time pressures of
delivering on promised features which don’t ordinarily permit thinking holistically about development
processes or thinking about and/or negotiating changes in those processes with other team members for
overall productivity improvements. It took a while for THG staff members to put on this new thinking cap.

**NOTE: need to highlight here need for teams to be able to incorporate IGs into routine development work
without extra resources and how PSIP helps to facilitate that**.

### Impact of Extra Funding Specifically for Process Improvements
The fact that team members were, by virtue of this contract, obligated to deliver on whatever process
improvements team consensus determined as well as the free energy to think about, plan and execute such
process improvements the extra funding enabled was certainly an important motivator and factor in getting
staff members to look at their work activities with new, overall productivity-oriented, eyes. Nonetheless,
it would be a mistake to conclude from this that the additional funding alone is the sole reason or even
majority reason for any progress and successes attributable to PSIP. All stakeholders in this work agree
that while additional funding certainly did help, it helped primarily from the perspective of creating
the expectation/requirement to deliver on something, in this case process improvements. For this team,
being asked to improve their processes as a deliverable for a customer was not something with which they
had much experience, especially when the particular improvements and how to go about enacting them were
to be determined primarily by the team and not the customer. 

As THG staff got more comfortable developing PTCs, a sort of two-tiered approach to each PTC emerged where
each major progress step was itself decomposed into its own PTC with a few to several sub-steps.

## Outcomes and Overall Assessment
PSIP has been a phenomenal success! Substantial progress was made on all three IGs. The progress achieved
exceeded our expectations. In one example, the coding standards goal (IG3) had been attempted multiple
times previously but success had eluded this team for many years.

Three sub-teams of between 7 and 14 THG staff members consumed a cumulative of only ½ FTE of effort to
effect critical process improvements. Subsequent productivity boosts due to improved processes are likely
to recapture this cost in the first year, if not sooner. Project leadership and frontline developers at
THG anticipate continuing to use PSIP for future process improvements.

Some of the more positive things THG staff had to say were…
* “It was an enjoyable project and we did good things. There was a lot of enthusiasm and good energy.”
* “PSIP helped us come to consensus on coding standards by defining small steps within which we could then work as a team to find common ground. Maybe we would arrive to the same state with a different methodology, but the relaxing nature of PSIP process definitely made it easier.”
* “The PSIP kick-off meeting was very useful. It helped explain the process very well. The PSIP website was informative and example PTC cards helped us quite a bit.”
* “The completion of IG1 represents a true culture shift internally in THG regarding documentation.”
Some of the challenges THG staff identified were…
* Avoid having team members work in isolation for extended periods without opportunities for others to provide feedback on directions being taken. 
* Eliciting feedback from developers outside of routine PTC progress meetings was difficult due primarily to availability of developer’s attention.
* As new processes are adopted by key stakeholders, eventually the whole staff needs to be re-trained on new processes. Finding time in everyone’s schedule and suitable training resources isn’t necessarily easy nor are these costs immediately apparent when embarking on PSIP.

### Comparison with Other Methodologies
An important bit of experience THG brings to the question of evaluating PSIP effectiveness is its
20+ years history in developing HDF5. Over the years, this team has used a variety of software
process improvement methodologies and has the ability to offer some comparative assessment of PSIP
relative to these other approaches.

PSIP was found to be significantly more light weight than other approaches such as CMMI or PMBOK.
But that doesn’t necessarily imply that PSIP is only for lightweight tasks. PSIP avoids a lot of
front loaded, preparatory work such as cost estimating, WBS, project planning. In those other
methodologies, a lot of that preparatory work is done by PMs or PIs and the team is just given their
assignments. In PSIP, all stakeholders are engaged from the beginning and the whole process of
planning an execution feels more democratized.

PSIP also relieves team members of the baggage of having to learn a lot of special verbiage or
terminology to start applying PSIP. Top-down process improvement models such as CMM(I) can often
begin with too much abstraction making them disconnected from the sometimes unique, concrete
software development tasks any specific project demands. This gives people opportunities to hide
behind (or become overly enamored with) these abstractions. The simplicity of PSIP is that it
gives people an opportunity to propose and advocate for specific, concrete process improvements.

PSIP is more hands-on and practical and less abstract than these other methodologies. There are
more opportunities to demonstrate progress and engender a feeling of having completed various steps.
In PSIP, the vision for improvement goals and implementation strategy comes from the team. The
team members are not assigned by management. They are involved because they are passionate and
interested in the improvement. Unfortunately, for THG it is rare when someone on the team has the
opportunity to work on a task s/he is passionate about (except that THG staff is passionate about
its software in general). Team members are also motivated to learn new technologies and/or share
their knowledge. Better team chemistry and members engagement in process improvement goals was
observed during the use of PSIP.

**NOTE: mention current multi-threading or async. efforts**

To manage community contributions to HDF5, the PSIP approach may be very useful. PTCs
should be created with community participation with each step divided into smaller achievable steps.
Different members of community can join THG at different times contributing self-contained
improvements toward a given process improvement goal.
