# What I Learned About Software Sustainability Engineering

#### Contributed by [Peter Lindstrom](https://github.com/lindstro) and [Mark C. Miller](https://github.com/markcmiller86)

#### Publication date: April 26, 2024

<!-- begin deck -->
A conversation about software sustainability engineering in the zfp project as part of the Exascale Computing Project.
<!-- end deck -->

At its core, [zfp](https://computing.llnl.gov/projects/zfp) is a C library for lossy compression of multi-dimensional arrays of floating point data.
Over the course of the Exascale Computing Project (ECP), the zfp project was pushed not only to add a number of operational features including C/C++ language-friendly array types, C/C++/Fortran/Python language bindings, OpenMP and CUDA parallelism and HDF5 integration but also to harden various of the software sustainability engineering (SSE) practices used in its development.
BSSw.io editor Mark Miller spoke with Peter Lindstrom, who led the ECP zfp project, about his effort to harden the SSE practices of zfp.

**Mark:** Do you feel like ECP did its part by providing funding and deploying technologies and it was left up to you and your team to learn to use and apply them? Do you feel like ECP really supported you in your SSE quests on zfp?

**Peter:** I can absolutely say that zfp would not be anywhere near where it is without the *funding* ECP provided.
This allowed me to hire developers/software engineers to do the work to transform zfp from a research prototype to a production-quality package.
I had to do a lot of learning on the job; other than funding, I can't point to anything in particular that ECP provided to facilitate this learning process, though I am aware that ECP has also supported various training activities (of which I, unfortunately, did not have the opportunity take advantage).
Another thing ECP did was give us access to hardware vendor software engineers who helped with performance tuning.

Working together with ECP Application Development (AD) and Software Technologies (ST) customers has also benefited zfp in terms of learning about features that would be useful and in terms of integrating zfp into other packages and applications.
I found many ECP meetings to be productive because most of these interactions occurred at them.
My institution, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), provided additional support through their [RADIUSS](https://computing.llnl.gov/projects/radiuss) program, particularly to develop the Python API.
There have been other funding sources for zfp, though primarily for basic or applied research on floating point data compression and not directly responsible for SSE.

I also feel that LLNL's change in stance from supporting only restrictive, custom licenses (circa 2015) to encouraging open-source development under more permissive licenses has also helped a lot.
I used to maintain zfp release assets in a somewhat adhoc fashion on the LLNL Computing department's web server.
[Ian Lee](https://github.com/IanLee1521) took it upon himself to set up a GitHub repo for zfp (and other products), which really got the ball rolling on starting new SSE practices.

**Mark:** If you had it to do all over again (I mean the SSE learning curve/ramp), how would you do it differently and/or what resources would have made it easier/faster?

**Peter:** To be honest, I don't think I would have benefited as much from taking formal training to learn the tools and practices I now use daily.
I feel that I need to get my hands dirty and *do* in order to learn.
But it was very helpful to work with and learn from someone (Markus Salasoo, a zfp developer who had industry experience with SSE).
I think I relied a bit too much on Markus in the beginning.
It was only after he left the project that I really had to roll up my own sleeves and get immersed in git/GitHub and learn how to use these and other tools.

In this sense, I feel like learning on the job can be a good thing.
On the other hand, I find that we sometimes spend a lot of time searching for answers to deal with oddball continuous integration (CI) and software tool issues.
It would be nice to have access to a help desk or hotline to get questions like these answered quickly from experts to cut down on time spent searching for answers.
Sometimes Slack helps to get such questions answered, sometimes not.

**Mark:** My own experience with even the free version of ChatGPT is that it often helps me to find a key entry point into a large body of documentation on a topic I am not familiar with.
For example, I used it to help guide my adding OpenMP parallelism to the [hello-numerical-world](https://github.com/markcmiller86/hello-numerical-world/tree/main) example and it got me, an OpenMP novice at the time, up and running in less than an hour.
I think if I had had to read through documentation, it would have been more than 4 hours.
That said, the free version of ChatGPT doesn't know anything newer than ~2021.

**Peter:** From a personal perspective, I remember feeling a bit overwhelmed having to learn ReadTheDocs, Sphinx, and RST to write zfp documentation from scratch in only a few weeks to meet an ECP deadline while Markus was working on writing tests and hooking up Travis CI.
In retrospect, it really wasn't that bad--everything seems easy once you know it--but it can seem challenging when you don't even know where to start.
I was very close to going with tools I was more familiar with (LaTeX, HTML) and alternatives (e.g., Doxygen) but am glad I bit the bullet and went with ReadTheDocs, Sphinx and RST instead.
With the amount of documentation we now have, it would have been impossible to scale things up with a less capable documentation toolchain.

**Mark:** Humans are often bad at judging cost/benefit trade offs.
When the [VisIt](https://visit.llnl.gov) project [transitioned from Subversion to git/GitHub](https://bssw.io/blog_posts/continuous-technology-refreshment-an-introduction-using-recent-tech-refresh-experiences-on-visit), we were all worried about the added time and effort needed to review each other's pull requests.
Within just a week or two of being on GitHub, we had caught enough problems in pull request reviews that we were quickly convinced the cost was worth the benefit.

**Mark:** Where do you think SSE practices on zfp compare with other similar projects you are aware of or familiar with?

**Peter:** When it comes to SSE practices (e.g. testing, documentation, code quality, and portability), I think zfp is in a good place when compared with other, similar packages.
Developers working on similar packages have even commented that zfp works out of the box without hitches while other packages do not fare so well -- something even documented in published papers.

On the other hand, zfp is basically a two-person team and there's only so much we know.
Compared to efforts like [MFEM](https://mfem.org/) and [RAJA](https://computing.llnl.gov/projects/raja-managing-application-portability-next-generation-platforms), I feel that we have much to learn in terms of SSE practices.
These projects have much larger teams, however, so maybe the comparison is unfair.


**Mark:** Do you feel like your own personal investments in applying SSE practices in zfp was time well spent or do you feel like it took you too far astray from your core research objectives?

**Peter:** I have certainly learned a lot of SSE over the last seven years that zfp has been funded by ECP.
Because of that, I no longer consider myself only a researcher.
On the other hand, I don't consider myself an expert software developer, either.
I think I have found the right balance somewhere in the middle of R&D.
I have at least made an attempt to adopt a number of best practices in software development.

I'm actually grateful that I got to spend this time to learn how to take a research prototype and transition it into a product that's being widely used and even productized by a big company like Intel.
Yes, I'm doing far less research today, but I also enjoy developing zfp and am proud of the work we've done.
So I have no regrets in that regard.

I also do think that I'm busier than ever.
Leading zfp R&D is (or at least could be) a full-time job.
I would love to hire more software engineers and researchers (maybe a postdoc) to expand the zfp team, but there's currently no budget for that.
That would also mean more time overseeing people and less time doing what I truly enjoy--getting my fingers dirty.

Something that I have contemplated (if I had the funds) is standing up a small committee/council/advisory team to guide design decisions and help with software engineering issues.
These would be people I could go to with difficult questions that I feel experienced industry experts who develop real products would know how to answer and where I feel I lack expertise.
These would also be people with some familiarity with the zfp code base.

One challenge with zfp is that we support so many languages, back-ends, and other products and use cases (including storage, I/O, communication, host-device transfers, in-memory array representation), and I'm at best a novice with respect to most of them.
Similarly with SSE, e.g., when it comes to designing classes and APIs, and even how to best implement certain functionality (thread-safe compressed-array views come to mind).
There are also design issues to consider in terms of performance, e.g., to make zfp hardware friendly, to make it easily parallelizable for GPUs, etc.
I can't be an expert on all these topics, so having access to those who do these things for a living would be valuable.

### Author bios

[Peter Lindstrom](https://people.llnl.gov/lindstrom2) is a computer scientist and project leader in the [Center for Applied Scientific Computing (CASC)](https://computing.llnl.gov/casc).
His research interests include data compression, geometric modeling and processing, scientific visualization, and high-performance computing.

[Mark C. Miller](https://people.llnl.gov/miller86) is a computer scientist supporting the [WSC](https://wci.llnl.gov/about-us/weapon-simulation-and-computing) program at [LLNL](https://www.llnl.gov) since 1995.
Among other things, he contributes to [VisIt](https://wci.llnl.gov/simulation/computer-codes/visit), [Silo](https://wci.llnl.gov/simulation/computer-codes/silo), [HDF5](https://www.hdfgroup.org) and [IDEAS-ECP](https://ideas-productivity.org/activities/ideas-ecp/).

<!---
Publish: yes
Topics: documentation, software engineering, continuous integration testing
Track: experience
--->

